[HOME](../index.md)

## Beauty and the Beast

Phil Donahue

Compared to the animals around us, there’s no doubt we are a remarkable phenomenon. Someone referred to us the “superdeluxe model”: we walk, we talk, we smile, we taste, we touch, we think. All this is in a relatively small and attractive package. We’re also very good with our hands. In the comparatively brief time we’ve been available in the current form - about 50,000 years – we’ve invented the wheel, the alphabet, the clock, the reciprocating machine, the cyclotron, and everything in between. When we weren’t busy making progress, we invented more playful things like music, art, baseball, and bridge. Over the years, we’ve demonstrated an admirable willingness to cooperate with each other. We assemble in big groups to form towns and cities; we get together in twos to discover love. We’ve also shown a lot of individual spunk. The wheel wasn’t invented by a committee, and Albert Einstein, by himself, revolutionized our understanding of the universe.

Of course, most of our uniquely human accomplishments are the result of a combination of a cooperation and individual achievement. Even Charles Lindbergh had a ground crew. Beethoven composed the Ninth Symphony in the solitude of deafness, but scores of musicians are needed to bring it to life. Neil Armstrong had to have personal courage to step out on the surface of the moon, knowing that he might sink into 15 feet of “moondust,” but he had an army of people to help him there and bring him back.

We can only imagine what it must have felt like to stand on the moon; look back at the earth, suspended like a blue-and-white marble in space; and think how far we human have come in such a short time. That feeling itself - the tightening in the throat, the tingle up the spine, the tear of pride- is unique to the human animal. Throughout most of our history, that feeling belonged exclusively to religion. When most people’s lives were “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,” religion was the only thing that made them feel dignified, special, and proud of being human.

The peasants who gazed for the first time at the stained glass in the cathedral at Chartres undoubtedly experienced that same feeling-the most human of emotions-wonder. Most of them had never been inside anything bigger than a thatched hut and never seen anything more colorful than a piece of dyed cloth. Even today, the sight of this huge, arched space with those luminous windows suspended high in the darkness is almost enough to make a believer of even the most skeptical. In 1260, when the church was consecrated, the peasants who shuffled through those doors must have thought they had died and gone to heaven.

In fact, Chartres cathedral, like dozens of other cathedrals built in the same period, is the medieval equivalent of the modern effort to put a man on the moon. Both represent the perfect combination of individual achievement and group cooperation in the pursuit of something beautiful and lasting. The space program would never have gotten off the ground if Wernher von Braun hadn’t made his discoveries in the field of jet propulsion, and the arches of Chartres would never have soared if an anonymous French architect hadn’t devised a system of buttresses to support a two-ton block of stone 120 feet in the air and keep it there for a thousand years. But there would have been no stones to support if the wealthier townspeople hadn’t dug deep into their pockets and come up with the money needed for construction. The glass in the openings would be clear instead of stained if merchant guilds, members of the nobility, and even the French king hadn’t contribute money for the windows. And all the money would have been worthless if legions of craftsmen hadn’t been willing to dedicate their skills and often their lives to making this not just another building, but a monument to human achievement.

Bees get together and build hives, termites build mounds, beavers build dams, and spiders spin webs, but what other animal can change stone and glass into poetry? Other animal can alter their environment at the margins, but only we can transform our environment so completely that we reshape our destiny. Alone in the animal kingdom, we can set goals for ourselves and then pursue them. The dream of the medi craftsmen who built Chartres was to secure a place for themselves in heaven. By lavishing love on this stone and glass, they glorified God and hoped to be rewarded in the next life. But in the process, they changed this life, made it more beautiful and more worth living.

A place like Chartres makes us proud to be human. We can stand tall and hold our heads high. Certainly no other creature could conceive and create something of such sublime beauty, Case closed? Hardly. There is, unfortunately, another side to the human animal that’s nothing to be proud of. At places like Chartres, it’s easy—and tempting—to overlook this other side, the ugly side, of our nature. But we can’t begin to understand the human animal without it. Surely there’s beauty inside us—but there’s also a beast, a part of us that we’d like to deny but can’t, a part that gives us a knot in the stomach instead of a lump in the throat.

Even the God-loving people who fashioned the soaring vaults and delicate windows of Chartres had murder on their minds. Some of the workers may well have been veterans of the First Crusade, an expedition to save the Holy Land from the infidel Muslims that was part religious frenzy, part military adventure, and part social fad. On that excursion, begun four years after work in Chartres began, the Crusaders slaughtered thousands of noncombatants, leveled whole communities, and finally “saved” the holy city of Jerusalem by massacring all its inhabitants-men, women, children, Muslims, Jews: everybody. Muslims, after all, were only infidels, not humans, so it wasn’t like killing your next door neighbor.

After the shrines of Christianity were in “safe” hands, many Crusaders returned home and turned their attention to other things, like the cathedral at Chartres.

How could the same hands that carved these stones and stained this glass have wielded swords and butchered women and children? How could so much beauty and so much brutality exist side by side? This is the great contradiction of the human animal. We can pray one minute and kill the next, create one minute and destroy the next, even love and hate simultaneously. We like to think that our erratic behavior is a thing of the past, that we’ve outgrown the excesses of the Crusades. But nothing could be further from truth. There are people in Belfast today who will repeat the catechism, then go toss a bomb into a crowded pub; people who grieve for the victims of crime, then pay good money to see it reenacted on a movie screen. The same technological wizardry, individual bravery, and group effort that put us on the moon have also given us weapons that can blow our whole planet into permanent winter.

 Far from having disappeared with the last Crusade, the human animal’s strange capacity for contradictory behavior still affects our daily lives. As parents, we desperately want our kids to grow up emotionally healthy, able to love and be to loved; then our culture teaches them that sex is dirty and they should be ashamed of their sexual desires. Women say they want to marry a nice person who will respect them and communicate with them; then they melt for machismo and fall for the strong, silent type. They want a man who will share the housework and feed the baby at three in the morning, but they live in a society in which few bosses grant time off to men who want to share parenting. Cops throw drunken drivers in jail while television sells beer as though it were an American entitlement. The message to teenage males:”You’re not a man without a beer can in your hand.” But there are millions of teenage drivers and thousands of cloverleaves out there, and the phone rings every day, in homes across America, and it’s the hospital calling—or the morgue.

Why do we do the things we do? Why, after thousands of years of personal tragedies and group catastrophes, do we continue to make the same mistake? Why do we persist in the same contradictory behavior day after day, century after century, alternating between Chartres and the Crusades, between grief and gore, between moonwalks and megatons?

These questions aren’t just for the historians and the sociologists. They’re for everyone who wrestles with these contradictory drives in his or her own life. The impulse that sends a society back to war, despite the knowledge that children will die and mother will grieve, is the same impulse that leads you to light up another cigarette or have “one more for road,” despite the knowledge that it may kill you. We live with contradictions in our own behavior—and the behavior of others—every day. Are they a permanent part of the human condition, or can we do something about them?

[HOME](../index.md)